Nicholas Piazza: Dr. Rodriguez, can you see and hear me okay?
Dr. Rodriguez: Yes, everything's clear. Just finished up with my last patient for the morning.
Nicholas Piazza: Perfect timing then. Thank you for making time for this discussion about our cardiac imaging systems. I understand you've been using both our CardioImage CT suite and the new 3D Echo platform?
Dr. Rodriguez: Yes, we've been using both systems for about eight months now. The technology itself is impressive, but there are some workflow issues we need to address. Particularly with how the systems handle data storage and integration with our PACS. And the AI-assisted analysis features, while promising, aren't quite where they need to be for high-volume clinical use.
Nicholas Piazza: Could you elaborate on those workflow issues? What specific challenges are you encountering?
Dr. Rodriguez: Let me give you a concrete example. This morning, I had a complex structural heart case. Needed to review prior CT scans alongside new 3D echo images for pre-procedural planning. Your CardioImage viewer has excellent tools for CT analysis, but switching between CT and echo datasets is cumbersome. I have to close one study completely to open another, losing my measurements and annotations. In the old days, we could at least have two monitors with different studies open. Now, with everything integrated into one system, we've actually lost some of that basic functionality.
Nicholas Piazza: That's interesting. How does this impact your clinical workflow and decision-making process?
Dr. Rodriguez: It significantly slows down our valve clinic workflow. We're doing 12-15 TAVR evaluations weekly, each requiring careful comparison of CT and echo measurements. The lack of side-by-side viewing means I'm constantly toggling between studies, trying to remember measurements, or worse, writing them down on paper. And during our heart team meetings, when we need to quickly compare multiple imaging modalities, it becomes really frustrating. We often end up taking screenshots and pasting them into PowerPoint just to show everything simultaneously.
Nicholas Piazza: You mentioned AI-assisted analysis earlier. Could you tell me more about your experience with those features?
Dr. Rodriguez: The AI shows promise, but it's not consistent enough yet. For CT analysis, the automated vessel detection and calcium scoring work well maybe 70% of the time. But for complex anatomy or previous stents, it often misses key segments or gives erroneous measurements. The 3D echo AI is even more problematic. It's supposed to automatically detect chamber boundaries and calculate ejection fraction, but we're finding significant variability in the results. Our sonographers end up manually correcting most of the auto-traced boundaries, which takes longer than just doing it manually from scratch. And there's no way to "teach" the AI from these corrections – it makes the same mistakes on the next study.
Nicholas Piazza: How do these accuracy issues affect your confidence in using the automated features?
Dr. Rodriguez: I've basically stopped using the automated measurements for clinical decision-making. I'll let it run in the background, but I always verify everything manually. This creates another issue – our reports now often show discrepancies between the AI-generated measurements and my manual measurements. We have to document why we didn't use the automated values, which adds time to our reporting workflow. And for research studies where we need consistent methodology, we've had to disable the AI features entirely because they introduce too much variability. This means we're not really getting the time-saving benefits that were promised with these features.
Nicholas Piazza: What about the system's performance with different types of studies? Any specific strengths or weaknesses?
Dr. Rodriguez: The CT system handles standard coronary studies well, but when we get into complex congenital cases or aortic studies that require longer scan ranges, the rendering performance really suffers. Loading a full chest-to-pelvis CT with thin slices can take several minutes, even on our newest workstations. The 3D echo system actually performs better in this regard – volume renders are pretty smooth. But it has other limitations. The measurement tools are clearly designed for transthoracic echo and don't work as well for TEE or stress echo studies. And for interventional procedures where we need real-time 3D guidance, the latency is still noticeable.
Nicholas Piazza: Could you tell me more about how you use these systems during interventional procedures?
Dr. Rodriguez: We use them primarily for structural heart procedures – TAVR, MitraClip, left atrial appendage closure. The 3D echo system is crucial for these cases, but the current setup isn't optimal. The viewing screen is too far from the sterile field, so I'm constantly having to tell others to adjust the view. Voice control was supposed to solve this, but it's unreliable in the noisy cath lab environment. And while we can import planning measurements from the CT system, they don't always align well with the live echo images. We need better registration between the pre-procedure CT and intra-procedure echo.
Nicholas Piazza: What about the reporting capabilities? How well do they meet your needs?
Dr. Rodriguez: The reporting tools need significant improvement. The templates are too rigid and don't adapt well to different types of studies. For complex cases, I often need to describe findings that don't fit into the standard fields. The workaround is to put everything in the free-text comments, but then we lose the structured data that's supposed to be helpful for research and quality metrics. Also, the system doesn't handle addenda well. If I need to add a comment after signing a report, it generates a separate document rather than updating the original report. This creates confusion when other providers are reviewing the results.
Nicholas Piazza: How do you handle image sharing with referring physicians or other institutions?
Dr. Rodriguez: That's another pain point. The system can export standard DICOM files, but all the advanced post-processing and measurements are lost. If we want to share a complete analysis with another facility, we have to either give them access to our system – which is a whole IT security issue – or generate PDFs that don't include the interactive features. And don't get me started on trying to share images with patients. The patient portal can only handle basic JPEG snapshots, not the full 3D datasets that would actually be useful for explaining findings to patients.
Nicholas Piazza: Speaking of patient education, how do you currently use the imaging systems when discussing findings with patients?
Dr. Rodriguez: The 3D visualizations are actually great for patient education, when they work. Being able to rotate and manipulate 3D heart models helps patients understand their anatomy and planned procedures. But the patient-facing views are limited. We need simplified controls and better touch-screen interaction for use in clinic. Right now, I'm often taking video recordings of the 3D manipulations and showing those to patients because the live interface is too complicated for quick clinic visits.
Nicholas Piazza: What about integration with your EMR and other clinical systems?
Dr. Rodriguez: The integration is partial at best. Yes, we can launch the viewer from within the EMR, but it opens in a separate window with a separate login. Orders don't flow properly from the EMR to the imaging systems, so we often have double entry. Results flow back to the EMR, but without the rich imaging data. And the measurements don't automatically populate our structured cardiac reporting systems, so we're manually transferring data that should be automatic.
Nicholas Piazza: How do these systems handle archive and retrieval of prior studies?
Dr. Rodriguez: This is a major issue for us. The local cache on the workstations is too small, so older studies are constantly being purged to the archive. Retrieving archived studies can take 15-20 minutes, which is unacceptable when you're in clinic or doing emergency cases. And the search functionality is basic – we can't search by specific findings or measurements, only by standard DICOM fields. If I want to find all the cases where we measured a particular valve size or identified a specific pathology, I have to maintain separate spreadsheets with this information.
Nicholas Piazza: What about teaching and research applications? How well do the systems support these activities?
Dr. Rodriguez: The teaching capabilities could be much better. We can't easily create anonymized teaching files or share interesting cases with trainees. The conference mode is clunky – everyone needs their own login, and annotations made during teaching sessions aren't saved properly. For research, we need better tools for batch analysis and data export. Currently, we have to manually extract measurements one case at a time, which makes large-scale studies impractical. We also need better tools for comparing measurements between different observers for validation studies.
Nicholas Piazza: How do you handle system updates and new feature rollouts?
Dr. Rodriguez: Updates are disruptive because they require downtime for both systems, and there's always a learning curve with new features. The training provided is usually too basic and doesn't address real-world clinical scenarios. When new measurement tools or analysis features are added, we need time to validate them against our current methods before implementing them in clinical practice. But there's no test environment where we can try new features without affecting our production system. And sometimes updates change the user interface significantly without warning, which creates confusion among the staff.
Nicholas Piazza: What about mobile access to these systems? Do you use any of the mobile viewing features?
Dr. Rodriguez: The mobile viewing options are too limited. I can review basic images on my tablet, but none of the advanced processing tools are available. This is particularly problematic when I'm on call and need to make clinical decisions based on emergency studies. The mobile viewer doesn't support side-by-side comparison or any of the measurement tools. And while image quality on newer tablets is actually quite good, the software doesn't take advantage of touch interfaces or Apple Pencil support that could make remote viewing more efficient.
Nicholas Piazza: What are your thoughts on the system's handling of radiation dose tracking and reporting?
Dr. Rodriguez: The dose tracking features need work. Yes, the system records dose information, but the analysis tools are basic. We need better ways to track cumulative dose across multiple studies and automatically flag high-exposure cases. The current system doesn't help us optimize protocols based on dose data, and the integration with our dose monitoring software is inconsistent. For research studies where we need to track dose carefully, we end up maintaining separate records because we can't easily extract this information from the system.
Nicholas Piazza: If you could prioritize improvements, what would be your top three requests?
Dr. Rodriguez: First would be better integration between CT and echo data, with true side-by-side viewing and synchronized measurements. Second would be more reliable AI analysis tools that can actually learn from corrections and user feedback. And third would be improved reporting tools with more flexible templates and better structured data capture. But really, what we need is a fundamental rethinking of the workflow. These systems feel like they were designed by engineers who've never spent a day in a busy cardiac imaging department.
Nicholas Piazza: Would you be willing to participate in some user testing as we develop these improvements?
Dr. Rodriguez: Absolutely, and I think it's crucial that you involve clinicians early in the design process. Too often, we only see these systems after they're nearly finished, when it's too late to make fundamental changes. I'd be happy to have your team observe our workflow and provide feedback on prototypes. And I can probably get some of our fellows involved as well – they often have good insights since they're actively learning the systems and can spot unnecessarily complicated workflows that those of us who've been using them for years have just gotten used to.
Nicholas Piazza: That would be incredibly helpful. Is there anything else you think we should know?
Dr. Rodriguez: Just that we really need these systems to evolve to match the way modern cardiac imaging is practiced. We're doing increasingly complex procedures, often combining multiple imaging modalities, and the technology needs to keep up. The basic image quality is excellent, but the workflow tools haven't evolved at the same pace. If we can address these issues, I think we could significantly improve both efficiency and quality of care.
Nicholas Piazza: Thank you so much for your detailed feedback, Dr. Rodriguez. This has been extremely helpful.
Dr. Rodriguez: You're welcome. Looking forward to seeing the improvements.